And so they got really into bird watching later in life.
These are their report cards.
This is Wilbur's report card.
With some of the topics he's studying, like reading, spelling, writing, composition, arithmetic, grammar, geography, U.S.
history.
I mean, their grades are fairly good.
94 in arithmetic.
94 in grammar.
100 in geography.
No mark for U.S.
history.
Spelling 92.
All A's.
Composition B.
80.
Deportment 100.
Good for you, Orville.
Well, here's Orville.
Habits of application.
Medium.
Whatever that meant.
What year is that?
This is 1888.
1888.
Central High School.
Yeah.
Deportment in and about school.
Good.
Doing okay.
All right.
It's kind of a shot being fired across his mouth.
One of the interesting things that people often ask is, why did Orville and Wilber record all the stuff in diaries?
And the thought is, their father kept a diary from 1857 until he died in 1917.
They were very prolific writers.
They were well-educated.
They were well-read.
They were following an example, I think, from their father of recording what they were doing.
They were the bishop's voice.
Well, yeah, as Tom Crouch says.
This is one of their father's diaries.
This particular one,
is from the year, well, the day that Wilbur died of typhoid fever, and he died at home at Hawthorne Hill.
And the bishop writes, the bishop was a prolific writer and publisher, editor of The Religious Telescope and other church publications.
In this particular entry, he's talking about Wilbur passing away of typhoid fever, and he says, this morning at 315, Wilbur passed away, aged 45 years, one month, and 14 days,
a short life full of consequences, an unfailing intellect, imperturbable temper, great self-reliance, and as great modesty, seeing the right clearly, pursuing it steadily, he lived and died.
Wow.
That's pretty controlled.
It's very controlled and formal.
When a parent is deceased like a child, it's a very well-tempered eulogy, isn't it?
You'd like that on the day that he died.
Yeah.
A little more passionate.
Well, yeah, me too.
A couple days later, you see a little bit more emotion.
Wilbur is dead and buried.
This is Monday, June 2, 1912.
He died a couple days.
How about you reading it for me?
Wilbur is dead and buried.
We are all stricken.
It does not seem possible that he is gone.
Probably Orville and Catherine feel his loss most.
They say little, many letters.
Ezra Coons comes and reads Wilbur's will.
and leaves coffee.
I ride 20 miles with Orville in auto.
Orville's first car was delivered the week that Wilbur died.
And that summer, they went on lots of automobile rides.
Was it a long illness, or did he just get sick and die?
He got sick.
He was in Boston working with lawyers with the patent suits in probably, if he died, the end of May, April.
First came home, I think, ill in late April.
So it was within a month, six weeks.
Oh, I have to pose for a picture.
But I'll be right out from you.
We published the diaries at the Brook.
I can give you one of those if you want.
I call it my doorstop.
It's an edited version of all the diary entries.
Sometimes the bishop is a very descriptive writer, and other times he's very boring.
He'll say he's working on his papers.
Does he talk about reading or anything in there?
Somewhat, yeah.
He talks about publishing the religious telescope and troubles he's having with the church.
He's a very controversial man in the church and caused a lot of trouble and a split at one point.
I don't know if I need that.
You're welcome to take one if you want.
You could always mail one to me.
That looks like that.
Yeah, that's fine.
We'd be happy to do that.
This is our published guide to our collection.
This is entirely online.
Okay.
So you could either take a copy of this.
If it's online.
It's online.
That's fine.
Yeah, this is just illustrated with photographs.
Do you have a copy of this?
This might be very helpful.
You can take it.
Get a better feel maybe for what's here.
That would be good.
I think something like that would be.
And I can get that up and hold.
If I need it.
The other things here are albums that are full of wonderful photographs.
of the Wright Brothers Flight.
We're giving you a copy.
We've reproduced the Red Album with McGraw-Hill as a copywriter.
Oh, that's fabulous.
Yeah, that's great, yeah.
Do you want to take a look at, why don't I go get the list of books?
Why don't you go do your picture?
Okay, well, I don't want to.
No, no worries.
I can send somebody back with the list so that you can take a look.
Okay, do you want to send somebody back with the list?
Is that open then?
Yeah, these are open.
They're not locked.
Just hit the top, and you can take a look at the kinds of things that they had in their library.
Let me just put this stuff.
No, okay.
So you were saying?
She was really, throughout Orville's life, of course, Orville survived Wilbur by many years.
She was his companion, a helpmate, and a loyal sister.
And near the end, when she was fairly old, and Dawn can amplify this, she knows much more about it than I do.
I was telling about the rift that development laid between Orville and his sister when she decided to marry.
Yeah.
And he basically disowned her, right?
That's a long story, yeah.
Yeah.
And then she died.
She died not too long after that.
Yeah.
Well, Catherine had taken care of her family for so many years.
They were very comfortable.
Earl and Catherine were living in the Hawthorne Hill.
She fell in love and got a marriage proposal and decided, you know, it's time for me to go off and have my own.
And how old was she?
She was in her 50s.
Oh, really?
Wow.
Yeah.
The gentleman she married was Terry Haskell, who was editor of the Kansas City Star, who had written some books and was very intelligent.
He was a friend of Orville.
They'd known him since Oberlin College days.
He was a student at Oberlin.
The captain was there.
And she decided to get married, and she kept her secret from Orville for a month because she knew he would be furious when he found out, and he was.
And she went ahead and left and got married.
He did not attend the wedding, and he wouldn't speak to her or write to her.
Lauren eventually convinced him to go to her when she was on her deathbed.
And the family says she was already unconscious.
Orville did go to Kansas City.
But it was too late.
She never knew he was there.
That's a very sad story.
It really is.
Pretty spiteful in his pipe, if I may say.
It doesn't speak very well of him.
Yeah, that's the one thing I don't like about it.
I'll be right back.
I'm sorry.
Yeah, that was... Yeah, so she's a very interesting...
Very, very answering figure.
Of course, she's the only one in the immediate family that's got a university education.
Hmm.
Interesting.
Yeah.
What did she major in, do you know?
Education.
She's a teacher, yeah.
Yeah, she became a school teacher.
I don't know if they had education majors.
Well, Oberlin...
They trained a lot of teachers.
Did they?
Oh, yeah.
They had a big statue on the campus there for missionaries who died in a box or we died in or something like that.
Oh, is that right?
Overland really has a great tradition of training teachers.
Yeah.
This is Psychology by William James.
And it's an otherwise unremarkable, certainly not a first edition.
It's 1812.
It's 1893.
Well, it might be the first, yeah.
It's copyright 1892 by Henry Holt and Company.
1892 there.
Yeah, and it's got the date on the front, so it is.
And again, it's from the private library of Orville Wright, but it bears the ownership, a very nice hand, signature of Catherine Wright,
I'm going to find paste now.
Maybe we'll take a picture of that.
If we get something, we can just hold this, crop this up.
Maybe you can hold it.
Why don't you just hold it?
I just don't see how she does have a nice hand.
Don't you have a beautiful hand, sir?
Oh, good enough.
Let's just get the title page if we can.
Well, she signed it again.
She signed it twice.
She's got a date, too.
1896.
Very good.
Oh, yeah, she did.
She read it.
Read it in underlined.
Blue console.
Okay, what kinds of things is she underlining?
The self, page 191.
The wider material self.
Men have arranged.
Very careful reader, isn't she?
Yeah.
Let's see if she did any annotations in the back.
Psychology.
I think there are more books in the collection that don't have any cases, or more school books, I think.
And it may even be the earlier generation, like this one, 1835, I'm not sure.
Is that from their collection?
Yes.
I love that she signed that twice, not once, you know.
Yeah.
Very heavily annotated.
Not annotated, but underlined.
Yeah, she's annotated.
I need to find when Don comes back that philosophy test.
Yeah, I'd love to see that.
Introduction to the study of philosophy.
Yeah, and I don't know this.
I have a PhD in philosophy, but I wasn't familiar with this guy.
Let's see if she...
oh here we go here we go oh okay yeah see okay so this even got her spring term so she was a student this was at uh this is the introduction to philosophy she's got spring term on there let me see let me see and then i think she's got something yeah
It's not unlike any other student.
Yeah.
I mean, it's nothing to do.
Look how wonderful hand.
I don't believe remarkable, but I mean, it is interesting.
She's kept these books.
There's a doctor of divinity.
Who's the author again?
It's going to be here.
And it looks like she did a lot of what philosophy is not.
Mm-hmm.
There's a lot of annotations in here.
Let's see if she'd put anything at the end.
Yeah, oh, here you go.
You need to get that.
Catherine has heavily annotated.
Stuckenberg.
Okay, what has she written there?
Well, that's the... What is mine, no matter what is matter, never mind.
You know, typical philosophy...
But she's written that.
What did she say again?
Read it for me.
What is mine?
No matter.
What is matter?
Never mind.
That's great.
And that's on the back page down.
Right.
Let me just get the right library down there, too.
That's kind of cool.
That could be any library.
So we're identifying this, doesn't it?
I see if she's got any other remarkable annotations.
Well, she clearly read this for very...
from beginning to end.
I mean, it's underlined from beginning to end.
And you have a PhD, you say, in philosophy, and you don't know the book, so it's really... I don't know the author.
He's probably a guy that's done in the divinity schools, and he did the... That's a ninth edition, though.
Did I just see that?
Yeah, well... No, no, no, no, no.
I thought that was a ninth.
I was a CEO.
He...
It looks like a pretty standard, uh... What is she written back there?
What's that say?
Right there.
Practical reform.
Yeah.
So she's probably a part of lectures, too, you know.
Interesting.
Very, very interesting.
Yeah, yeah.
No, she, uh, but that's kind of the standard, standard breakout.
This side.
You know, Holocaust is a great philosophy.
It's a private world.
Oh, yeah, you do some of your research there?
Yeah, well, it's just there.
They give me full privileges.
They're at the Clark, so between them, they've got a million books.
Very rarely do I have to run into Harvard, you know.
They do, yeah, the Jesuits, you know, they did great stuff.
Yeah, it's really fine.
It's a good school.
No, the Holy Cross isn't Jesuits.
There are brothers in the Holy Cross, actually.
Are they Jesuits?
No, they're not.
But they, that place is a great reintroduction.
I thought they were, but maybe they're not.
How about Boston College?
Boston College, definitely.
They have the Jesuits.
Yeah, Boston College.
Yeah, I went to a Jesuit.
Oh, you did, so you'd know that.
You were talking about the orientation.
Oh, yeah.
Bird neighbors, an introduction, acquaintance with 150 of our common birds.
Great.
Let's take a picture of this one.
You got it.
Yeah, maybe the same experience.
I don't want to handle this.
Perhaps one of you could open it up to the annotations.
Do you want this part?
It's a list of the birds in the area, which is kind of cool.
Maybe you can stick up the envelope that's addressed to her, too.
Do you think these are her lists?
I think it's her list.
Her handwriting looks like her list.
I know it.
I know they were three cents when I was a kid.
So she's just marking the birds that she's seen?
Yeah, yep.
There's some color plates.
And again, does this have her ownership signature in it?
And an envelope.
Usually they would have found it.
Yeah.
Well, that's great.
I don't think I shot 60 pictures on it.
These digital cameras are distinct.
You can keep going and going, huh?
Yeah.
I shot 60.
I can go up to 280.
You got 60 on there?
I already shot 60 too.
Well.
Are there any more?
of these books that you want to watch?
No, I think it's great.
I think we've covered it.
Yeah, it's terrific.
School books or anything?
Yeah, that's okay.
I've got enough here to really... Okay.
...Huffman Field.
Prairie is where they... It was a farmer's cow pasture, basically, and they rented it from Farmer Huffman, and their only requirement was to shoo the cows out of the field before they...
And that's really the first practical flying was done.
And they invented, not only did they invent the theoretical concepts and the physical plane, but they were the ones that, much to their personal danger, personal safety, discovered how to practically fly an airplane.
If you want to, there might be nice, you could get some shots at this.
It's a very compelling place.
There's two signatures of photos in these books.
I shoot off my phone.
The other thing is, Don, is this story apocryphal about the undertaker who drove his wagon up there and waited?
Somebody told me.
I thought that was you.
Oh, I think I did hear that.
I don't think I told you that story.
This is over in Orville at Huffman Prairie in 1904.
Who knows what they're talking about?
Who's shooting it?
Are they carrying their own documentarian?
It's their own camera.
It's probably ... It might have been the brother who took the photograph.
It could have been ... It's a very nicely composed photo.
It's 16 ... It's 16.5.2.
That's our ID number for it.
A little over 2,000 photographs are online at our website.
I have a brochure for you with a web address on it.
And you can sit and look at pictures to your heart's content.
That's a nicely composed photograph.
He's got the whole fryer in there.
He's got a nice casual.
And you know they're posing because you don't have pretty fast explosions.
Which is which?
Wilbur's on the right, and Orville's on the left.
Orville had a mustache, and Wilbur did not.
That's the easiest way to remember.
Do you have any shots with them up in the air?
Yeah, yeah.
Here's what the prairie looked like from the distance with the plane back there.
These are all on your website, right?
Yeah.
And these all came from the family?
Mm-hmm.
And Elsie didn't want these.
Are they crazy?
I'm not going to tell that, are you?
I'm astonished.
The fire has taken off.
It's in the air there.
It's not very high.
It's a lot.
Look at it.
Here's another one that's a little bit.
Has anybody written about who's doing all the photography?
There have been a couple articles done on the photography.
I'll dig those out for you, and I can send those to you.
That'd be good.
Yeah, they'd be really good.
We have a professor here at Wright State, Ron Guybert, who's done some studying of the photography, as well as Jeff Johns here at Wright State, and there's a UD professor.
Are these now, were they like glass negatives?
Yes.
And so they were in fact negatives.
Mm-hmm.
And that's, I think that's a very, is that the famous one?
That's here again.
That's here.
They spent hours, hours flying around us.
And that's where he did his figure eights.
Wilbur never lives to see the application of World War I. These are wonderful.
I'll trade you.
These are 1905.
And this is when they're actually flying in circles around the field.
Think about what I find so extraordinary, because these guys are, no one has done this before.
Look how high up they are.
I mean, there's not a manual on how to fly and safety.
I mean, how many times did they crash a bunch of times?
Oh, they had so many mishaps.
It's amazing.
Well, the normal didn't die before they... We have one rather unusual and unique item.
We do have the...
We do have the x-ray of Orville's broken leg in our archives.
These are wonderful.
And these are all original prints, right?
Most of them, yeah.
They might be.
Did they keep their necks?
I mean, the glass plates?
The glass plates of these photographs are at the library.
I'll see you took the plates.
That's a beautiful picture.
Yeah.
Wonderful photographer.
Robert Cummish has put all those flash plates online, so you can look at it.
Let's look at that picture.
There it is.
Yeah, it's lens, too.
Pretty sharp, you know.
It's amazing.
It's really wonderful.
You know, we could keep you busy for hours in here.
Oh, I think so.
One part of the collection that's really remarkable is all the European photos.
of Italy and Germany and France.
Yesterday we had visitors here from Pau, France, where Wilbur flew in 1908 and they were just fascinated.
Maybe you'd like to see... We have their calling card collection.
And it's like a who's who.
I'll bet.
Sure.
I don't know what it actually has.
It's a...
President Taft, this is a great shot here.
Wow.
Look at that, huh?
And that's Catherine.
This is 1909, and they're being presented at the Aero Club of America meeting at the White House.
And that's the Ohio president right there?
Mm-hmm.
Great.
they say that he's thin in this picture he's not much bigger as he got older looks like a pretty stuck sturdy guy right there this is um there's two boxes full of these these are in alphabetical order but these are business calling cards like duval la chapelle was one of the pilots the rights train frank long was another one of the pilots um
What was so much fun yesterday, as the French people went through this, they recognized the names of a lot of these people, and there's a story to go with every single name in here.
Oh, sure.
Look at this.
Georges Amoyer, the engineering council, I guess.
They met the heads of state of Europe, prominent businessmen, inventors.
I mean, a lot of French names, and they all gave their colors, didn't they?
They kept them all, too.
There's a few at the back.
We have Wilbur and Orville's cards.
We don't have too many of them.
This stuff today, you see, I wrote a little bit about this one in my books.
I mean, the material artifact today is so important.
This is really it.
Here we go.
Here's Loewenwright's card, their brother.
Um, Orville Wright is his card.
What is Orville's card?
He's Wilbur's.
Oh, wow.
Bruce Leonard is one of their oldest brothers.
The calling card is just a whole story in itself.
Yeah, it sure is.
Of people that they met throughout their careers.
Is that his signature?
Mm-hmm.
Of course, uh, we did on an auction, this is our national auction, and we did about two weeks ago for an Orville Wright letter.
We were outbid, and eventually, beyond our capacity, the letter went for over $10,000.
And one writes currently today.
We have to do that today.
The Wilbur Wright letter that's being offered.
Well, we're thinking it'll probably go for around $15,000.
Now, who's Wilbur L. Wright, M.D.?
We're not sure.
I don't think it's a relative.
I think it's just a coincidence.
Somebody, yeah.
And they thought it was kind of cool, and they put it in the collection?
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, fascinating.
We get a lot of requests from people who say, my grandmother told me I was related to the White Butters.
Well, you take a look up in your White Butters genealogy to figure out if we're related.
Most of the time, of course, it's not.
They're not.
It's not an uncommon name, I'm sure, too.
Yeah.
This particular album goes along with the events
in the photograph here.
This is kind of a souvenir album, and these medals were presented.
Arrow Club of America medals.
The Arrow Club of America officials and CAFT and some of the other dignitaries of the time wrote letters of recognition to the Reich.
Here's Augustus Post, who was at the Arrow Club of America.
Kind of a scrapbook of
testimonials or congratulatory letters.
1908.
It's amazing how quickly things started to happen, isn't it?
Mm-hmm.
It's a beautiful certificate.
Look at that.
That's really fabulous, isn't it?
Mm-hmm.
There's, like, a reproduction of this photograph.
I like it.
Is this their scrapbook?
This has been pretty nice, very neatly put together.
Who do you suppose did this for them?
The Aero Club.
Oh, the Aero Club.
Probably, yeah.
Here's the same photograph, and maybe other people will find it.
Robert Wright, Orville Wright, Catherine Wright.
Wow.
You wonder what something like that would go for at auction, you know?
Thousands.
Unbelievable, right?
Yeah.
And this came from the... This is a part of their personal collection.
It was probably presented to them as a souvenir of the occasion of this...
The awarding of the medal.
That's very nice.
Hold it up a little bit.
I think it's going to be a little distorted.
That's good.
A little more, maybe.
That's perfect.
My new toy.
I never thought I'd go digital until I got it.
Really?
I'll have to get it.
Yeah, this is the new one, the new Nikon.
It just came out in April.
I really wanted one.
It's a single lens reflex.
So I can change, put all my Nikon lenses on this.
Right.
300 millimeter and it's done.
So I got a camera.
Yeah.
Fabulous.
Let's see.
What else could be shown here in the clip?
Orville Botany's sketchbook.
Sure.
Want to see that?
And then that brings us up to like 11.20.
Yeah, yeah.
I'll get my memory out here.
Thank you.
Plant Notes, 1887?
Mm-hmm.
All right.
And how old do you suppose he is at this point?
He was born in 71.
He was a kid.
Yeah.
Teenager.
Here's his drawing of the sassafras.
Yeah, sure.
Can you lay it flat?
He wasn't a bad artist.
Look at that, huh?
That's actually drawn by hand.
Uh-huh.
There he is.
Now, is this down in conjunction with school, do you figure out?
Uh-huh, yeah.
These are from Richmond High School.
class of 84, and here Wilbur Wright is the high school's cyclopedia.
He must have done some sort of recitation or something, well, no, that's music dividing these recitations probably.
But Orville never finished high school?
I thought Orville had, I thought he graduated with Paul Dunbar, but... Nope, Dunbar graduated, but Orville didn't.
Orville did not graduate.
No, he dropped out.
The high school dropped out.
Did he say he was a voracious reader?
It's the best of my knowledge, yeah.
Well, Father's influence undoubtedly.
I think Wilbur probably read more than Orville, but... But the book's all there, the Orville, right?
Of course, Wilbur died young.
Yeah, Wilbur died until the books were all in Orville's library.
Yeah, right, exactly.
A side story.
you see some mud and dirt on here in 1913 in march dayton had a huge flood flood mud from 1913 they didn't get tossed which is good yeah they're muddy you know the um the glass plate negative and many of the photographs were in the shed behind the hawkling street house here in dayton not the house you'll see today with the original home when the flood happened the flood waters flooded the whole first floor of the house and the shed
Luckily, the glass plates were not damaged, very little damaged, and survived.
I mean, that flood could have potentially wiped out all photographs that we have.
So, pretty remarkable.
Yeah, it is.
Yeah, that flood was really catastrophic.
And you know, Henry Ford came down to Dayton at 36, and took the bicycle shop in the original White House, and they're now in Greenfield.
But if you go there, Ford took those buildings and, you know, they're wonderful, but the Wright brothers, it's interesting because the whole
history and support for the Wright Brothers' legacy and all of that is fairly recent here.
It seems to be a whole lot of interesting.
The report came down, of course, 1936, because the area
The area wasn't supporting it.
The area wasn't supporting it in the West 3rd Street, where they're kind of in now.
They're doing some restoration.
They've rebuilt some of that.
You can go get on it.
They rebuilt the bicycle shop.
It's very nice to see them.
I'm all for that.
I think this has been very successful.